---
layout: post
title: Is This the Year? 
---

20 years. This fall, it will have been 20 years since the last Super Bowl season for the Cowboys. For some of you older fans, that's only a small part of your life; you can remember all the way back to those dominant teams of the 1970s, maybfe further. For me and my generation, the Cowboys have been mediocre a lot more than they have been good. I think it is safe to say for all of us Cowboys fans, its been a long, long time. 

I'm gonna say something which is a bit scary to say out loud, because we all know how many times the Cowboys have gotten our hopes up only to crush them over the last decade. Does this feel like *the* year for anyone else? The year that it is all going to change? The year that the Cowboys break through? I think there are a lot of reasons to this it might be, and just as many if not more to believe that even if this year doesn't work out, the Cowboys are finally in a palce where they will see continued success. I'll get to all of that in a moment, but before I do, in order to understand what it all means in the context of this franchise and our long-suffering fanhood, I need to talk about some Cowboys memories.

One of my first, maybe the first memory of the Cowboys I have was sitting in the living room eating buffalo wings as the Cowboys were playing the Buffalo Bills in their second matchup in two years. I was a child and it all inherently made sense. Of course you'd eat buffalo at at time like this, and of course the Cowboys were and would always be this good. Its just how things were supposed to be. You didn't question it and you didn't realize how good you had it.

One of my next memories introduced the notion that maybe the Cowboys weren't unbeatable, and by extension, that life doesn't always wrap itself up in a bow and give you what you want. It was the NFC championship game for the 1994 season, the Cowboys were at Candlestick, which was a muddy mess that day. For some reason my dad had to visit his office so instead of watching the first half of the game, I listened to it on the radio. I particularly rememebr listening to it on this big old radio that probably sits in the exact same spot in his office to this day, some two decades later. I sat in a strange kind of disbelief as the Boys went down by 21 points within the first quarter. They tried to claw themselves back (irnocially, a missed pass interference call on a long bomb when Deion was covering Irvin mahye have been the only thing that prevented a comeback), but they just made too many mistakes. We had since returned home, and I remember watching hte last few minutes tick off and then Steve Young running around the field doing a victory lap and my mom complaining how he was so rude because he knocked over a camera guy. Steve Young is one of the few athletes that I grudgingly respect becuase he was so good but have an irrational hatred for becaue he beat my team. It is unbelievable how close that team came to winning four Super Bowls in a row. Steve Young. Ugh.

